General improvements to WakuRelay spec (#316)
vacp2p/rfc: content/docs/rfcs/11/README.md

  - Sanaz Taheri <sanaz@status.im>
---

> <!-- A note to contributors:

Reviewer: I'd suggest to point to a common CONTRIBUTING.md file instead so that we don't need to change all RFCs to update guidelines.

Author: Thanks. I've removed this comment in aeae2b5. In fact, since there already exists [contributing guidelines](https://github.com/vacp2p/rfc#contributing) for this repo, it will be better to just add `sembr` to that.

Please make use of the following best practices when adding to this document:
- semantic line breaks as per https://sembr.org/
- RFC key words as per RFC 2119 (https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2119.txt) -->

> `WakuRelay` specifies a [Publish/Subscribe approach](https://docs.libp2p.io/concepts/publish-subscribe/) to peer-to-peer messaging with a strong focus on privacy, censorship-resistance, security and scalability.

Reviewer 2: Instead if WakuRelay I'd call this 11/WAKU2-RELAY (ditto other parts of the spec)

Author: Done in aeae2b5

> `WakuRelay` specifies a [Publish/Subscribe approach](https://docs.libp2p.io/concepts/publish-subscribe/) to peer-to-peer messaging with a strong focus on privacy, censorship-resistance, security and scalability.

Reviewer 2: I'd add all the unique links to a Reference section at the end, so we know what we are building on / make sure it is a canonical place / no dead links etc. No need for reference number though, just in addition to what exists now.

Author: Done in aeae2b5

Its current implementation is a minor extension of the [libp2p GossipSub protocol](https://github.com/libp2p/specs/blob/master/pubsub/gossipsub/README.md) and prescribes gossip-based dissemination.
As such the scope is limited to defining a separate [`protocol id`](https://github.com/libp2p/specs/blob/master/connections/README.md#protocol-negotiationn) for `WakuRelay`, establishing privacy and security requirements, and defining how the underlying GossipSub is to be interpreted and implemented within the Waku and cryptoeconomic domain.

**Protocol identifier**: `/vac/waku/relay/2.0.0-beta2`

# Security Requirements

> The `WakuRelay` protocol is designed to provide the following security properties under a static [Adversarial Model](#adversarial-model).

Reviewer 2: Formatting - the spacing looks bigger than one newline but maybe this is just GH preview? (Same in other places, but doesn't look like newline or newspace)

Author: Mmm, interesting. There's only a single LF-character each after lines 24 and 25. Think this may be a preview thing - there were double LFs elsewhere, which I've fixed in aeae2b5.

> Note that data confidentiality, integrity, and authenticity are currently considered out of scope for the `WakuRelay` protocol and must be handled by higher layer protocols such as [WakuMessage](https://github.com/vacp2p/specs/blob/master/specs/waku/v2/waku-message.md).

Reviewer 2: Should link to rfc site url

Reviewer: I think @oskarth was able to use relative links in another PR.

Author: Done in aeae2b5

`WakuRelay` specifies the following usage requirements for each field:

- The `from` field MUST NOT be used, following the [`StrictNoSign` signature policy](#Signature-Policy).

- The `data` field MUST be filled out with a `WakuMessage`.
See the [Waku Message](waku-message.md) spec for more details.

- The `seqno` field MUST NOT be used, following the [`StrictNoSign` signature policy](#Signature-Policy).

- The `topicIDs` field MUST contain the topics that a message is being published on.

- The `signature` field MUST NOT be used, following the [`StrictNoSign` signature policy](#Signature-Policy).

- The `key` field MUST NOT be used, following the [`StrictNoSign` signature policy](#Signature-Policy).

## SubOpts fields

The `SubOpts` protobuf defines the format in which subscription options are relayed between peers.
A `WakuRelay` node MAY decide to subscribe or unsubscribe from topics by sending updates using `SubOpts`.
The following usage requirements apply:

- The `subscribe` field MUST contain a boolean, where `true` indicates subscribe and `false` indicates unsubscribe to a topic.

- The `topicid` field MUST contain the topic.

## Signature Policy

> The [`StrictNoSign` option](https://github.com/libp2p/specs/blob/master/pubsub/README.md#signature-policy-options) MUST be used, to ensure that messages are built without the `signature`, `key`, `from` and `seqno` fields. Note that this does not merely imply that these fields be empty, but that they MUST be _absent_ from the marshalled message.

Reviewer 2: What's the significance of this distinction?

Reviewer: Use sembr

Author: There's a slight semantic difference between an empty field and an absent field in protobuf (an empty field will still have a populated field tag number when marshalled, which could lead to dodgy interpretations when unmarshalled). The latter is specified by PubSub for `StrictNoSign`, but repeated here as it may be an important implementation requirement for `11/WAKU2-RELAY`.

As the result of the `StrictNoSign` policy, `Message`s should be built without the  `from`, `signature` and `key` fields since each of these three fields individually counts as PII for the author of the message (one can link the creation of the message with libp2p peerId and thus indirectly with the IP address of the publisher). 
Note that removing identifiable information from messages cannot lead to perfect unlinkability.
The direct connections of a publisher might be able to figure out which `Message`s belong to that publisher by analyzing its traffic.
The possibility of such inference may get higher when the `data` field is also not encrypted by the upper-level protocols. <!-- TODO: more investigation on traffic analysis attacks and their success probability-->

- **Subscriber-Topic Unlinkability:**
To preserve subscriber-topic unlinkability, it is recommended by [Waku v2 specs](https://github.com/vacp2p/specs/blob/master/specs/waku/v2/waku-v2.md#default-pubsub-topic) to use a single PubSub topic in the `WakuRelay` protocol.

> This allows an immediate subscriber-topic unlinkability where subscribers are not re-identifiable from their subscribed topic IDs as the entire network is linked to the same topic ID. This level of unlinkability / anonymity is known as [k-anonymity](https://www.privitar.com/blog/k-anonymity-an-introduction/) where k is proportional to the system size (number of subscribers).

Reviewer 3: To my understanding, all the nodes in waku relay are the subscribers of the waku relay's topic id (i.e., pubsub topic), as such, for a better clarity I suggest this edit:

```suggestion
This allows an immediate subscriber-topic unlinkability where subscribers are not re-identifiable from their subscribed topic IDs as the entire network is linked to the same topic ID. This level of unlinkability / anonymity is known as [k-anonymity](https://www.privitar.com/blog/k-anonymity-an-introduction/) where k is proportional to the system size (number of participants of Waku relay protocol).
```

However, note that `WakuRelay` supports the use of more than one topic.

> In that case, the unlinkability should be addressed by the upper-level protocols through e.g., [partitioned topics technique](https://specs.status.im/spec/10#partitioned-topic) which enables K-anonymity for the peers' subscribed topic ids.

Reviewer 2: SHOULD?

Reviewer 3: I think you are referring to this part
>In that case, the unlinkability **should** be addressed by the upper-level protocols through e.g.,

Since I have written the security analysis part, I took the liberty of replying to this comment :)

Agree, the use of SHOULD here is confusing, a better sentence is:
```suggestion
In case that more than one topic id is utilized, preserving unlinkability  is  the responsibility of the upper-level protocols which MAY adopt [partitioned topics technique](https://specs.status.im/spec/10#partitioned-topic) to achieve K-anonymity for the subscribed peers.
```

  <!-- TODO havn't checked if all the measures in libp2p GossipSub v1.1 are taken in the nim-libp2p as well, may need to audit the code --> 

- Providing **Unlinkability**, **Integrity** and  **Authenticity** simultaneously:
Integrity and authenticity are typically addressed through digital signatures and Message Authentication Code (MAC) schemes, however, the usage of digital signatures (where each signature is bound to a particular peer) contradicts with the unlinkability requirement (messages signed under a certain signature key are verifiable by a verification key that is bound to a particular publisher).
As such, integrity and authenticity are missing features in the `WakuRelay` protocol in the interest of unlinkability.
In future work, advanced signature schemes like group signatures can be utilized to enable authenticity, integrity, and unlinkability simultaneously.
In a group signature scheme, a member of a group can anonymously sign a message on behalf of the group as such the true signer is indistinguishable from other group members. <!-- TODO: shall I add a reference for group signatures?-->
  

> # Changelog

Reviewer 2: Given the simplification of lifecycle we could probably do away with this section. Draft means things can change, and once in stable it should only have cosmetic changes

Author: Do you mean to move this content away from the "Future Work"-section or to remove this section completely, including the content?

Author: Oh, wait. I realise now that you're probably referring to the `Changelog` section, not the `Future Work` section? 😀

Reviewer 2: correct
